Now we can start posing our character and see if there some issues that we need to take care of.
As we saw there's already one we know about here for the hips.
What I'm going to do first is go into weight paint mode and to do that I need to select the character
but I can't now because I'm in pose mode and the character doesn't have a pose mode so I can't click
it.
But what I can do is come over here to edit and uncheck this lock object modes and once I do that I'll
be able to select another mode object mode other than the one I'm in.
So I'm currently in post mode but now if I click on the character you can see I go to object mode.
Now I need to click on the character one more time.
And there we are.
So with the character selected I can come over here and now I have the modes for the character.
And right here is weight paint mode and a weight is just an influence how much influence a particular
bone has over a particular vertex.
So if we click this we can see now some various colors displayed now that we have this upper leg bone
selected here remember in texture painting mode.
We had this face selection masking turned on I'm going to turn that off for just a minute here so we
can see it just a little bit better and you can see that when I select or when I have this bone selected
this upper leg dot l selected this is the color or this is the influence the weights that are assigned
to this bone the color red signifies the strongest influence.
And blue signifies no influence at all but to demonstrate this actually I should probably go up to one
of these torso bones.
I think it's a little bit easier to see to select one of these bones.
What I need to do is press shift and right click and then I get a menu of the bones on the chain.
So this is spine one I need to click this one here.
So now you can see all the influence that is happening for this spine one if I shift right click for
this one I can choose a spine too and that's the influence that we see by come over here to the arm
shift right click and choose up arm L and that's the influence.
And you can see a pretty good gradation of influence here from the bright red which is a lot of influence
down to the orange yellow green light blue and then dark blue and that's just kind of a fairly gradual
gradient from high influence to none down here.
So what we can do is use the weight painting tools to change the amount of influence visually here as
we adjust our character.
So once again if we go to spine one what I'd like to do is get the influence here at spine one kind
of similar to the upper arm at the bone itself have a fairly strong red influence and then as we go
up towards spine to begin to gradually fall off and decrease the amount of influence.
So let's shift right click spine one right here and I'll go to the front view and what I'd like to do
is just paint a stronger influence here.
You can see up here I've got my strength at 1.0 and the amount of weight that I'm painting at 1.0 or
100 percent here.
And then if I go over to my active tool tab right here you can see I've got the brush tools for the
weight painting over here as well.
So I think I'll click this icon here and switch from DRAWER TO ADD and I've gotten my weight at 100
percent my strength is currently over here at Point two if I drag that up to 1.0 and now I can come
over here and just click and drag and I'm using the mouse currently and not the wake on tablet I'm not
using that for this but if I just click and drag here you can see I can increase the amount of of weight
at this bone.
Now I'm only painting at the vertices and it's kind of difficult to see where those are.
With the current view.
So if we come over here to the object panel here and come down here to wireframe once again and we can
even choose all edges we can see our wireframe here.
Now you can see as I paint how the influence is only painted on the vertices.
So I'll press the three key now and you can and I can click and drag down here and up to here and up
to here and you can see this is as far as I want it to go here.
Now go to the back view and press control one to do that and click and drag on these vertices here and
here and get that painted and then I'll press control three to come around to this side and paint these.
All right.
Back to the front view now I'm painting down here on the hips too.
I don't want to do that and I'll show you how we're going to fix that here in a minute.
But now I want to come up here and subtract the weight that's up here.
I don't need the weight of this spine one reaching all the way up to the top of the torso.
I want spine to to be controlling this area up here once again over to the active tool panel I'm going
to switch from add to subtract.
And once again I'm gonna take this strength up all the way.
And now if I click up here you can see I'm removing influence up here.
So back to that side view then to the back view with control 1 paint back here control 3 and paint back
here.
OK.
So now I've got this influence taken away up here.
Let's now go to spine to and do the same thing I'll press shift right click and choose spine 2.
And now we need to do a similar thing.
So while I'm here in subtract mode I'll go ahead and paint down here and let's keep going on around
here like this.
There we go.
And then let's get some more influence up here as well so I'll change from subtract back to add and
then we'll click and drag up here to really add some influence up here
we go oh I've added it onto the fingers over here you need to be careful and not do that.
So let me control Z that undo that.
We don't want that to happen and we go.
And I've also painted it onto the arm.
We're gonna need to get rid of this as well and I'll go over how to do that fairly easily here all right.
So now we've got this painted for the top looks like I've gone a little overboard here.
So what we can do for something like this.
You see how this is kind of slanted like this.
I kind of went a little overboard there.
So let's go back to subtract and instead of the weight being 1.0 let's take it down to point five and
I'll hit the f key again to change the size of the brush and let's just click on these vertices right
around here and you can see how I'm removing weight I'm removing point five of the weight out of the
vertices where I click.
So maybe over here I can click Yeah like that although that may be a little bit too much.
I just it controls you to undo that.
Let's take this down to point to five here.
There we go.
And let's go to the back view I'm just going to click on these here.
Now it looks like I have a good green here I don't want to take the green away too much here and I'd
like to add some of that green back.
So maybe I'll come back to the ADD tool and with point to five still selected or click in here.
Yeah.
So I can just add that back into that edge all right.
So now I've got the influence or the weight for spine one and spine to here.
Now I need to remove some of this from all this extraneous areas the hips the arms the legs and that's
where this face selection masking can come in handy here as well if I turn this on now I can come over
and hover over this arm let's say and select that.
Now when I do that selection carries over into edit mode.
So if I tap into edit mode you can see that arm is selected as well which is helpful because if we come
over here to this panel right here the Object data panel we have here a list of all the vertex groups
that were created when the character was bound to the bones bound to the armature.
So for each bone in here a vertex group was created and all the vertices that are influenced by this
particular bone are in that Vertex group.
So let me just d select everything here for just a moment.
And with spine to selected to come down here and choose select and you can see now that this is all
of the vertices in that spine to group.
And when I did the painting I accidentally overdid the painting and added these extra points in there
their right.
That shouldn't have happened I didn't want to do that.
So what I can do is I can remove vertices from this group.
Now let me d select everything and I'm going to go back to weight paint mode by pressing tab.
Now you can see here that the current vertex group is the upper leg group and we don't want that.
We want the spine some of the press shift right click and choose spine to you can see that over here.
Now if I select this arm with the L key tab in the edit mode this is selected spine to is selected and
we can click remove now any of the vertices in this selection that was in that spine to vertex group
have been removed from that group.
So if we tab back into white paint mode you can see here if we choose that spine to bone again right
there there are no vertices being influenced by that one bone.
So we can do the same thing for the right arm as well.
Now we don't have to choose the vertices here in weight paint mode.
We could tab in to edit mode and do the same thing here so if we hover over the arm and hit the L key
we can choose that we hover over the head choose the L key there that will select those areas and then
we can come over here with the spine to vertex group still selected.
We can click remove and there we go.
Now let's tab back into weight paint mode and if we shift right click this and choose spine to let me
try that again spine too.
There you go.
Now you can see that all of that extraneous painting has been removed from being influence by spine
too.
All right let's take a look at spine one shift right click.
Spine one.
Now here I want to get rid of all the influence on the hips.
So once again with the spine one vertex group selected the tab into edit mode hover over one of these
and hit the L key to select that whole piece there and click remove.
Now let's tab back into white paint mode shift right click spine one.
Now we've removed all the influence from the hips but you can see here look at this.
We've got influence from that bone on the legs as well.
So we might as well tab into edit mode and hover over one of these vertices and just select all of this
down here and then hit remove.
Now if we tab back in shift right click spine one and then we go.
So now that's pretty clean.
We've cleaned the influence up for spine 1 and spine 2 so that it's only influencing the things that
we want blind to.
Is there spine one is there.
Good.
We'll keep going with this in the next video we'll take a look at the hips and the legs.